README.md, before:

# Notebook Navigator for Obsidian

A plugin for [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) that replaces the default file explorer with a clean, Notes-style interface featuring a dual-pane layout with navigation pane on the left (folders and tags) and list pane on the right (notes), or an optional single-pane layout.

If you love using Notebook Navigator, please consider [buying me a coffee](https://buymeacoffee.com/johansan) or [Sponsor on GitHub ❤️](https://github.com/sponsors/johansan).

<a href="https://www.buymeacoffee.com/johansan" target="_blank"><img src="https://cdn.buymeacoffee.com/buttons/v2/default-yellow.png" alt="Buy Me A Coffee" style="height: 60px !important;width: 217px !important;" ></a>

## Screenshots

### Desktop

Transform your Obsidian file explorer from the default UI like this:

![Default Obsidian File Explorer](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator/blob/main/images/screenshot0.png?raw=true)

To a modern, Notes-style interface like this:

![Notebook Navigator Interface](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator/blob/main/images/screenshot1.png?raw=true)

### Mobile

![Notebook Navigator Interface](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator/blob/main/images/screenshot2.png?raw=true)

## Features

### Core Interface
- **Dual-pane layout** - Navigation pane (folders and tags) on left, list pane (notes) on right (desktop default)
- **Single-pane layout** - Clean interface switching between navigation and file list (mobile, optional on desktop)
- **Mobile optimized** - Touch gestures and responsive interface
- **Theme support** - Matches your Obsidian theme
- **Multi-language support** - Available in English, German, Spanish, French, Japanese, and Chinese Simplified
- **RTL language support** - Full support for right-to-left languages with proper layout mirroring and navigation

### Navigation & Organization
- **Tag browser** - Hierarchical tag tree with nested tag support
- **Pin notes** - Keep important notes at the top of folders and tags
- **Auto-reveal** - Automatically show the location of the current note
- **Keyboard first** - Full navigation with arrow keys and Tab
- **Multi-selection** - Select multiple notes with Cmd/Ctrl+Click and Shift+Click

### Notes Display
- **Smart previews** - Preview 1-5 lines of text from each note
- **Feature images** - Display thumbnail images from note frontmatter
- **Date grouping** - Organize by Today, Yesterday, This Week
- **Custom sorting** - Use custom sort preferences for each folder and tag
- **Folder notes** - Folders with notes are displayed as clickable links
- **Frontmatter support** - Read note names and timestamps from frontmatter

### Productivity
- **Drag & drop** - Move notes between folders, drag to tags to add tags, drag to Untagged to remove all tags
- **Resizable panes** - Adjust the layout to your needs
- **Smart filtering** - Exclude folders and notes with patterns
- **Visual customization** - Folder and tag colors and icons

## How to Use

1. Install the plugin from Obsidian's Community Plugins
2. The navigator will replace your default file explorer
3. Navigate using:
   - **Click** to select folders, tags, and notes
   - **Cmd/Ctrl+Click** to add notes to selection
   - **Shift+Click** to select a range of notes
   - **Double-click** folders and tags to expand/collapse
   - **Arrow keys** for navigation
   - **Tab** to switch between navigation pane and list pane
   - **Delete/Backspace** to delete (with optional confirmation)
4. Right-click for context menus:
   - Create new notes and folders
   - Rename items
   - Delete items
   - Move files to another folder
   - Pin/unpin notes
   - Change folder colors
   - Remove folder colors
5. Drag and drop notes between folders to organize, drag to tags to add tags, or drag to Untagged to remove all tags

**Tip:** You can use the ribbon icon (folder tree icon) in the left sidebar to activate Notebook Navigator in case you close it by mistake.

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Key | Action |
|-----|---------|
| ↑/↓ | Navigate up/down in current pane |
| ← | In navigation pane: collapse or go to parent<br>In list pane: switch to navigation pane |
| → | In navigation pane: expand or switch to list pane<br>In list pane: switch to editor |
| Tab | In navigation pane: switch to list pane<br>In list pane: switch to editor |
| Shift+Tab | Switch from list pane to navigation pane |
| PageUp/PageDown | Scroll up/down in navigation pane and list pane |
| Home/End | Jump to first/last item in current pane |
| Delete (Windows/Linux)<br>Backspace (macOS) | Delete selected item |
| Cmd/Ctrl+A | Select all notes in current folder |
| Cmd/Ctrl+Click | Toggle notes selection |
| Shift+Click | Select a range of notes |
| Shift+↑/↓ | Extend selection up/down |

### Commands

You can set custom hotkeys for these commands in Obsidian's Hotkeys settings:

**View & Navigation**
- `Notebook Navigator: Open` Opens the Notebook Navigator view in the left sidebar
- `Notebook Navigator: Reveal file` Reveals the currently open file in the navigator, expanding parent folders and scrolling to it. Useful if you have the setting "Show notes from subfolders" enabled and want to find out the folder of a specific note
- `Notebook Navigator: Navigate to folder` Opens a search dialog to quickly jump to any folder in your vault
- `Notebook Navigator: Focus file` Moves keyboard focus to the file list pane so you can navigate with arrow keys

**Layout & Display**
- `Notebook Navigator: Toggle dual pane layout` Toggles between single-pane and dual-pane layout on desktop
- `Notebook Navigator: Toggle show notes from subfolders` Toggles showing notes from subfolders

**File Operations**
- `Notebook Navigator: Create new note` Creates a new note in the currently selected folder. Unlike Obsidian's default new note command which only allows creating in the same folder as current note, root folder, or a specific folder, this always creates in your currently selected folder. **Tip:** You can bind Cmd/Ctrl+N to this command for a more intuitive workflow - just unbind it from Obsidian's built-in "Create new note" command first
- `Notebook Navigator: Move files` Move selected files to another folder, then automatically select the next file in the current folder (stays in the selected folder)
- `Notebook Navigator: Delete files` Delete selected files and automatically select the next file in the current folder (stays in the selected folder)

## Installation

### From Obsidian Community Plugins

1. Open Obsidian Settings
2. Navigate to Community Plugins
3. Search for "Notebook Navigator"
4. Click Install
5. Enable the plugin

**Note:** Available on both desktop and mobile versions of Obsidian.

### Beta Installation (via BRAT)

Until the plugin is approved in the Community Plugins directory, you can install it using BRAT:

1. Install the BRAT plugin from Community Plugins
2. Enable BRAT
3. In BRAT settings, click "Add Beta Plugin"
4. Enter the repository URL: `https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator`
5. Click "Add Plugin"
6. Enable "Notebook Navigator" in your Community Plugins settings

## Settings

### Top Level Settings

- **Single-pane layout:** Switch between navigation and file list in a single pane on desktop
- **Auto-reveal active note:** Automatically reveal and select notes when opened from Quick Switcher, links, or search
- **Show tooltips:** Display hover tooltips with additional information for notes and folders
- **Show file types:** Choose which file types to display in the navigator. Files not supported by Obsidian will open in your system's default application
  - Markdown only, Supported files, or All files
- **Excluded folders:** Comma-separated list of folders to hide. Supports wildcards: assets* (starts with), *_temp (ends with)
- **Excluded notes:** Comma-separated list of frontmatter properties. Notes containing any of these properties will be hidden (e.g., draft, private, archived)

### Navigation Pane

- **Auto-select first note on focus change:** Automatically select and open the first note when switching folders or tags
- **Auto-expand folders and tags:** Automatically expand folders and tags when they are selected
- **Show note count:** Display the number of notes in each folder and tag
- **Show icons:** Display icons next to folders and tags in the navigation pane
- **Collapse button behavior:** Choose what the expand/collapse all button affects
  - All folders and tags, Folders only, or Tags only

### Folders

- **Show root folder:** Display "Vault" as the root folder in the tree
- **Enable folder notes:** When enabled, folders with associated notes are displayed as clickable links
  - **Folder note name:** Name of the folder note without extension. Leave empty to use the same name as the folder
  - **Hide folder notes in list:** Hide the folder note from appearing in the folder's note list

### Tags

- **Show tags:** Display tags section below folders in the navigator
  - **Show tags above folders:** Display tags section before folders in the navigator. When enabled, tags appear at the top of the navigation pane
  - **Show favorites folder:** Display "Favorites" as a collapsible folder when favorite tags are configured
  - **Show tags folder:** Display "Tags" as a collapsible folder
  - **Show untagged notes:** Display "Untagged" item for notes without any tags
    - **Show untagged notes in favorites section:** Display untagged notes in the favorites section, either inside the folder or directly below favorites
  - **Favorite tags:** Comma-separated list of favorite tag patterns. Supports exact match, wildcards (*), and regex (/pattern/)
  - **Hidden tags:** Comma-separated list of tag patterns to hide from the tag tree. Supports exact match, wildcards (*), and regex (/pattern/)

### List Pane

- **Sort notes by:** Choose how notes are sorted in the note list
  - Date edited (newest/oldest first), Date created (newest/oldest first), or Title (A/Z first)
- **Group notes by date:** When sorted by date, group notes under date headers
- **Show notes from subfolders:** Display all notes from subfolders in the current folder view
  - **Show parent folder names:** Display the parent folder name for notes from subfolders
- **Date format:** Format for displaying dates (uses date-fns format)
- **Time format:** Format for displaying times (uses date-fns format)

### Notes

- **Read metadata from frontmatter:** Read note names and timestamps from frontmatter when available, falling back to file system values
  - **Name field:** Frontmatter field to use as the note display name. Leave empty to use the file name
  - **Created timestamp field:** Frontmatter field name for the created timestamp. Leave empty to only use file system date
  - **Modified timestamp field:** Frontmatter field name for the modified timestamp. Leave empty to only use file system date
  - **Timestamp format:** Format used to parse timestamps in frontmatter
- **Title rows:** Number of rows to display for note titles (1 or 2)
- **Show date:** Display the date below note names
- **Show note preview:** Display preview text beneath note names
  - **Skip headings in preview:** Skip heading lines when generating preview text
  - **Skip non-text in preview:** Skip images, embeds, and other non-text elements from preview text
  - **Preview rows:** Number of rows to display for preview text (1-5)
- **Show feature image:** Display thumbnail images from frontmatter. Tip: Use the "Featured Image" plugin to automatically set feature images for all your documents
  - **Image properties:** Comma-separated list of frontmatter properties to check for thumbnail images. The first property with an image will be used. If no image is found in the properties, the first embedded image in the document will be used (requires Obsidian 1.9.4+)

**Note:** When date, preview, and feature image are all disabled, the list pane displays in a compact "slim mode" with only note names, providing a cleaner, more minimal interface.

### Advanced

- **Confirm before deleting:** Show confirmation dialog when deleting notes or folders

## Tips and Tricks

### Creating beautiful note lists

Combine Notebook Navigator with the [Featured Image plugin](https://github.com/johansan/obsidian-featured-image) to display thumbnail previews in your list pane:

1. Install the Featured Image plugin
2. Enable "Show feature image" in Notebook Navigator settings
3. Your notes will automatically display thumbnails from the first image

#### Optimizing thumbnail performance

For best performance with Notebook Navigator's 42px thumbnails, configure these Featured Image plugin settings:

- **Create resized thumbnail:** `true`
- **Resized thumbnail frontmatter property:** `featureResized`
- **Max resized width:** `42` (or `84` for retina displays)
- **Max resized height:** `42` (or `84` for retina displays)
- **Fill resized dimensions:** `true`

Then in Notebook Navigator settings:
- **Image properties:** `featureResized, feature`

This configuration first checks for optimized 42px thumbnails (featureResized), then falls back to the full-size feature image if no thumbnail exists. The optimized thumbnails load quickly and display perfectly in the list pane.

### Using folder notes

Turn folders into clickable links for better organization:

1. Enable "Enable folder notes" in settings
2. Right-click a folder and select "Create folder note" to create an associated note
3. Folders with notes appear as clickable links (visually distinguished with an underline)
4. Click the folder name to open its note directly
5. Click anywhere else on the folder row to view the folder's note list as usual
6. Right-click and select "Delete folder note" to remove the association

Folder notes are perfect for:
- Project overviews and documentation
- Category descriptions
- Table of contents for folder contents
- Meeting notes or journals organized by folder

**Tips:**
- Set a custom folder note name like "index" or "readme" in settings
- Hide folder notes from note lists to keep things clean
- When you rename a folder, its folder note is automatically renamed too (if using folder name)
- Folders without notes still work normally - click to select and view their notes

### Organizing with pins

Pin frequently accessed notes to keep them at the top:
1. Right-click any note
2. Select "Pin note"
3. Pinned notes appear at the top with a 📌 icon

### Customizing folders and tags

Add visual organization with custom colors and icons:

1. Right-click any folder or tag
2. Select "Change color" or "Change icon"
3. Choose from a palette of colors or variety of Lucide icons
4. To remove, right-click and select "Remove color" or "Remove icon"

### Custom sort order

Each folder and tag can have its own sort preference:

1. Select a folder or tag
2. Click the sort button above the list pane (shows current sort mode)
3. Toggle between:
   - **Default**: Uses the global sort setting from preferences
   - **Custom**: Choose a specific sort order for this folder/tag only
4. Your custom sort preference is remembered for each folder and tag

### Using tags effectively

The tags section provides powerful ways to organize and find your notes:

- **Hierarchical organization:** Use nested tags like `#project/work/urgent` to create tag hierarchies
- **Quick filtering:** Click any tag to see all notes with that tag and its subtags
- **Untagged notes:** Find notes without tags by clicking "Untagged"
- **Drag to tag:** Drag notes onto tags to add that tag to the notes
- **Remove tags:** Drag notes to "Untagged" to remove all tags from those notes

### Managing draft and private notes

Use the "Excluded notes" setting to hide notes with specific frontmatter properties:

1. Add properties like `private, archived` to the excluded notes list
2. Add frontmatter to your notes:
   ```yaml
   ---
   private: true
   ---
   ```
3. These notes will be automatically hidden from the navigator

This is perfect for:
- Personal/sensitive content
- Archived notes you want to keep but not see daily
- Template files with a `template: true` property

## Support

If you have any questions, suggestions, or issues, please open an issue on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator).

## Development

### Built for Production

Notebook Navigator is built for reliability and performance with vaults containing thousands of notes:

**Robust Architecture**
- **Type-safe codebase**: Comprehensive TypeScript with complete type coverage - no `any` or `unknown` types
- **Memory-safe**: Automatic cleanup of event listeners, observers, and React components prevents memory leaks
- **Data integrity**: Promise queue serializes critical operations, preventing conflicts during rapid file operations
- **Stable UI**: Error boundaries keep the interface responsive if individual operations encounter issues

**Performance at Scale**
- **Handles 10,000+ notes**: TanStack Virtual renders only visible items, keeping scrolling smooth in large vaults
- **Instant startup**: Tag tree caching shows UI immediately while loading data in the background
- **Mobile-optimized**: Preserves scroll momentum and uses touch-optimized event handling
- **Smart caching**: Multi-layer caching minimizes disk operations and API calls

**Obsidian Compliance**
- **Plugin store approved**: Meets all Obsidian security and quality requirements
- **Safe file operations**: Uses only approved Obsidian APIs with proper error handling
- **Theme compatible**: Respects user themes with CSS variables and semantic classes
- **Cross-platform tested**: Verified on Windows, macOS, Linux, iOS, and Android

### Building from Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator.git
cd notebook-navigator

# Install dependencies (requires --legacy-peer-deps flag)
npm install --legacy-peer-deps

# Build for development (with watch mode)
npm run dev

# Build for production (recommended method)
./scripts/build.sh
```

**Note**: Use `./scripts/build.sh` instead of `npm run build`. This script runs the build and checks for an optional `scripts/build-local.sh` file (gitignored) that can contain local deployment commands.

### Key Files

- **Main entry point**: `src/main.ts` - Obsidian plugin lifecycle
- **React entry point**: `src/view/NotebookNavigatorView.tsx` - Mounts React app
- **Main component**: `src/components/NotebookNavigatorComponent.tsx` - Two-pane layout
- **Types**: `src/types/index.ts`, `src/types/virtualization.ts`, `src/types/obsidian-extended.ts`
- **Settings**: `src/settings.ts` - Plugin settings interface and UI

## About

Notebook Navigator is built and maintained by [Johan Sanneblad](https://www.linkedin.com/in/johansan/). Johan has a PhD in Software Development and has worked with innovation development for companies such as Apple, Electronic Arts, Google, Microsoft, Lego, SKF, Volvo Cars, Volvo Group and Yamaha.

Feel free to connect with me on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/johansan/).

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0) - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Updated docs to include references to emoji

README.md, after:

# Notebook Navigator for Obsidian

A plugin for [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) that replaces the default file explorer with a clean, Notes-style interface featuring a dual-pane layout with navigation pane on the left (folders and tags) and list pane on the right (notes), or an optional single-pane layout.

If you love using Notebook Navigator, please consider [buying me a coffee](https://buymeacoffee.com/johansan) or [Sponsor on GitHub ❤️](https://github.com/sponsors/johansan).

<a href="https://www.buymeacoffee.com/johansan" target="_blank"><img src="https://cdn.buymeacoffee.com/buttons/v2/default-yellow.png" alt="Buy Me A Coffee" style="height: 60px !important;width: 217px !important;" ></a>

## Screenshots

### Desktop

Transform your Obsidian file explorer from the default UI like this:

![Default Obsidian File Explorer](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator/blob/main/images/screenshot0.png?raw=true)

To a modern, Notes-style interface like this:

![Notebook Navigator Interface](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator/blob/main/images/screenshot1.png?raw=true)

### Mobile

![Notebook Navigator Interface](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator/blob/main/images/screenshot2.png?raw=true)

## Features

### Core Interface
- **Dual-pane layout** - Navigation pane (folders and tags) on left, list pane (notes) on right (desktop default)
- **Single-pane layout** - Clean interface switching between navigation and file list (mobile, optional on desktop)
- **Mobile optimized** - Touch gestures and responsive interface
- **Theme support** - Matches your Obsidian theme
- **Multi-language support** - Available in English, German, Spanish, French, Japanese, and Chinese Simplified
- **RTL language support** - Full support for right-to-left languages with proper layout mirroring and navigation

### Navigation & Organization
- **Tag browser** - Hierarchical tag tree with nested tag support
- **Pin notes** - Keep important notes at the top of folders and tags
- **Auto-reveal** - Automatically show the location of the current note
- **Keyboard first** - Full navigation with arrow keys and Tab
- **Multi-selection** - Select multiple notes with Cmd/Ctrl+Click and Shift+Click

### Notes Display
- **Smart previews** - Preview 1-5 lines of text from each note
- **Feature images** - Display thumbnail images from note frontmatter
- **Date grouping** - Organize by Today, Yesterday, This Week
- **Custom sorting** - Use custom sort preferences for each folder and tag
- **Folder notes** - Folders with notes are displayed as clickable links
- **Frontmatter support** - Read note names and timestamps from frontmatter

### Productivity
- **Drag & drop** - Move notes between folders, drag to tags to add tags, drag to Untagged to remove all tags
- **Resizable panes** - Adjust the layout to your needs
- **Smart filtering** - Exclude folders and notes with patterns
- **Visual customization** - Folder and tag colors, Lucide icons, and emoji icons

## How to Use

1. Install the plugin from Obsidian's Community Plugins
2. The navigator will replace your default file explorer
3. Navigate using:
   - **Click** to select folders, tags, and notes
   - **Cmd/Ctrl+Click** to add notes to selection
   - **Shift+Click** to select a range of notes
   - **Double-click** folders and tags to expand/collapse
   - **Arrow keys** for navigation
   - **Tab** to switch between navigation pane and list pane
   - **Delete/Backspace** to delete (with optional confirmation)
4. Right-click for context menus:
   - Create new notes and folders
   - Rename items
   - Delete items
   - Move files to another folder
   - Pin/unpin notes
   - Change folder colors and icons
   - Remove folder colors and icons
5. Drag and drop notes between folders to organize, drag to tags to add tags, or drag to Untagged to remove all tags

**Tip:** You can use the ribbon icon (folder tree icon) in the left sidebar to activate Notebook Navigator in case you close it by mistake.

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Key | Action |
|-----|---------|
| ↑/↓ | Navigate up/down in current pane |
| ← | In navigation pane: collapse or go to parent<br>In list pane: switch to navigation pane |
| → | In navigation pane: expand or switch to list pane<br>In list pane: switch to editor |
| Tab | In navigation pane: switch to list pane<br>In list pane: switch to editor |
| Shift+Tab | Switch from list pane to navigation pane |
| PageUp/PageDown | Scroll up/down in navigation pane and list pane |
| Home/End | Jump to first/last item in current pane |
| Delete (Windows/Linux)<br>Backspace (macOS) | Delete selected item |
| Cmd/Ctrl+A | Select all notes in current folder |
| Cmd/Ctrl+Click | Toggle notes selection |
| Shift+Click | Select a range of notes |
| Shift+↑/↓ | Extend selection up/down |

### Commands

You can set custom hotkeys for these commands in Obsidian's Hotkeys settings:

**View & Navigation**
- `Notebook Navigator: Open` Opens the Notebook Navigator view in the left sidebar
- `Notebook Navigator: Reveal file` Reveals the currently open file in the navigator, expanding parent folders and scrolling to it. Useful if you have the setting "Show notes from subfolders" enabled and want to find out the folder of a specific note
- `Notebook Navigator: Navigate to folder` Opens a search dialog to quickly jump to any folder in your vault
- `Notebook Navigator: Focus file` Moves keyboard focus to the file list pane so you can navigate with arrow keys

**Layout & Display**
- `Notebook Navigator: Toggle dual pane layout` Toggles between single-pane and dual-pane layout on desktop
- `Notebook Navigator: Toggle show notes from subfolders` Toggles showing notes from subfolders

**File Operations**
- `Notebook Navigator: Create new note` Creates a new note in the currently selected folder. Unlike Obsidian's default new note command which only allows creating in the same folder as current note, root folder, or a specific folder, this always creates in your currently selected folder. **Tip:** You can bind Cmd/Ctrl+N to this command for a more intuitive workflow - just unbind it from Obsidian's built-in "Create new note" command first
- `Notebook Navigator: Move files` Move selected files to another folder, then automatically select the next file in the current folder (stays in the selected folder)
- `Notebook Navigator: Delete files` Delete selected files and automatically select the next file in the current folder (stays in the selected folder)

## Installation

### From Obsidian Community Plugins

1. Open Obsidian Settings
2. Navigate to Community Plugins
3. Search for "Notebook Navigator"
4. Click Install
5. Enable the plugin

**Note:** Available on both desktop and mobile versions of Obsidian.

### Beta Installation (via BRAT)

Until the plugin is approved in the Community Plugins directory, you can install it using BRAT:

1. Install the BRAT plugin from Community Plugins
2. Enable BRAT
3. In BRAT settings, click "Add Beta Plugin"
4. Enter the repository URL: `https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator`
5. Click "Add Plugin"
6. Enable "Notebook Navigator" in your Community Plugins settings

## Settings

### Top Level Settings

- **Single-pane layout:** Switch between navigation and file list in a single pane on desktop
- **Auto-reveal active note:** Automatically reveal and select notes when opened from Quick Switcher, links, or search
- **Show tooltips:** Display hover tooltips with additional information for notes and folders
- **Show file types:** Choose which file types to display in the navigator. Files not supported by Obsidian will open in your system's default application
  - Markdown only, Supported files, or All files
- **Excluded folders:** Comma-separated list of folders to hide. Supports wildcards: assets* (starts with), *_temp (ends with)
- **Excluded notes:** Comma-separated list of frontmatter properties. Notes containing any of these properties will be hidden (e.g., draft, private, archived)

### Navigation Pane

- **Auto-select first note on focus change:** Automatically select and open the first note when switching folders or tags
- **Auto-expand folders and tags:** Automatically expand folders and tags when they are selected
- **Show note count:** Display the number of notes in each folder and tag
- **Show icons:** Display icons next to folders and tags in the navigation pane
- **Collapse button behavior:** Choose what the expand/collapse all button affects
  - All folders and tags, Folders only, or Tags only

### Folders

- **Show root folder:** Display "Vault" as the root folder in the tree
- **Enable folder notes:** When enabled, folders with associated notes are displayed as clickable links
  - **Folder note name:** Name of the folder note without extension. Leave empty to use the same name as the folder
  - **Hide folder notes in list:** Hide the folder note from appearing in the folder's note list

### Tags

- **Show tags:** Display tags section below folders in the navigator
  - **Show tags above folders:** Display tags section before folders in the navigator. When enabled, tags appear at the top of the navigation pane
  - **Show favorites folder:** Display "Favorites" as a collapsible folder when favorite tags are configured
  - **Show tags folder:** Display "Tags" as a collapsible folder
  - **Show untagged notes:** Display "Untagged" item for notes without any tags
    - **Show untagged notes in favorites section:** Display untagged notes in the favorites section, either inside the folder or directly below favorites
  - **Favorite tags:** Comma-separated list of favorite tag patterns. Supports exact match, wildcards (*), and regex (/pattern/)
  - **Hidden tags:** Comma-separated list of tag patterns to hide from the tag tree. Supports exact match, wildcards (*), and regex (/pattern/)

### List Pane

- **Sort notes by:** Choose how notes are sorted in the note list
  - Date edited (newest/oldest first), Date created (newest/oldest first), or Title (A/Z first)
- **Group notes by date:** When sorted by date, group notes under date headers
- **Show notes from subfolders:** Display all notes from subfolders in the current folder view
  - **Show parent folder names:** Display the parent folder name for notes from subfolders
- **Date format:** Format for displaying dates (uses date-fns format)
- **Time format:** Format for displaying times (uses date-fns format)

### Notes

- **Read metadata from frontmatter:** Read note names and timestamps from frontmatter when available, falling back to file system values
  - **Name field:** Frontmatter field to use as the note display name. Leave empty to use the file name
  - **Created timestamp field:** Frontmatter field name for the created timestamp. Leave empty to only use file system date
  - **Modified timestamp field:** Frontmatter field name for the modified timestamp. Leave empty to only use file system date
  - **Timestamp format:** Format used to parse timestamps in frontmatter
- **Title rows:** Number of rows to display for note titles (1 or 2)
- **Show date:** Display the date below note names
- **Show note preview:** Display preview text beneath note names
  - **Skip headings in preview:** Skip heading lines when generating preview text
  - **Skip non-text in preview:** Skip images, embeds, and other non-text elements from preview text
  - **Preview rows:** Number of rows to display for preview text (1-5)
- **Show feature image:** Display thumbnail images from frontmatter. Tip: Use the "Featured Image" plugin to automatically set feature images for all your documents
  - **Image properties:** Comma-separated list of frontmatter properties to check for thumbnail images. The first property with an image will be used. If no image is found in the properties, the first embedded image in the document will be used (requires Obsidian 1.9.4+)

**Note:** When date, preview, and feature image are all disabled, the list pane displays in a compact "slim mode" with only note names, providing a cleaner, more minimal interface.

### Advanced

- **Confirm before deleting:** Show confirmation dialog when deleting notes or folders

## Tips and Tricks

### Creating beautiful note lists

Combine Notebook Navigator with the [Featured Image plugin](https://github.com/johansan/obsidian-featured-image) to display thumbnail previews in your list pane:

1. Install the Featured Image plugin
2. Enable "Show feature image" in Notebook Navigator settings
3. Your notes will automatically display thumbnails from the first image

#### Optimizing thumbnail performance

For best performance with Notebook Navigator's 42px thumbnails, configure these Featured Image plugin settings:

- **Create resized thumbnail:** `true`
- **Resized thumbnail frontmatter property:** `featureResized`
- **Max resized width:** `42` (or `84` for retina displays)
- **Max resized height:** `42` (or `84` for retina displays)
- **Fill resized dimensions:** `true`

Then in Notebook Navigator settings:
- **Image properties:** `featureResized, feature`

This configuration first checks for optimized 42px thumbnails (featureResized), then falls back to the full-size feature image if no thumbnail exists. The optimized thumbnails load quickly and display perfectly in the list pane.

### Using folder notes

Turn folders into clickable links for better organization:

1. Enable "Enable folder notes" in settings
2. Right-click a folder and select "Create folder note" to create an associated note
3. Folders with notes appear as clickable links (visually distinguished with an underline)
4. Click the folder name to open its note directly
5. Click anywhere else on the folder row to view the folder's note list as usual
6. Right-click and select "Delete folder note" to remove the association

Folder notes are perfect for:
- Project overviews and documentation
- Category descriptions
- Table of contents for folder contents
- Meeting notes or journals organized by folder

**Tips:**
- Set a custom folder note name like "index" or "readme" in settings
- Hide folder notes from note lists to keep things clean
- When you rename a folder, its folder note is automatically renamed too (if using folder name)
- Folders without notes still work normally - click to select and view their notes

### Organizing with pins

Pin frequently accessed notes to keep them at the top:
1. Right-click any note
2. Select "Pin note"
3. Pinned notes appear at the top with a 📌 icon

### Customizing folders and tags

Add visual organization with custom colors and icons:

1. Right-click any folder or tag
2. Select "Change color" or "Change icon"
3. Choose from:
   - **Colors**: A palette of colors for folder/tag highlighting
   - **Icons**: Lucide icon library with search functionality
   - **Emojis**: Any emoji character for unique visual identification
4. To remove, right-click and select "Remove color" or "Remove icon"

**Emoji Tips:**
- Type or paste any emoji (🎨, 📚, ⭐, 🔥, etc.) for instant visual organization
- Recently used emojis are saved for quick access
- Perfect for project categories, priority levels, or personal organization systems

### Custom sort order

Each folder and tag can have its own sort preference:

1. Select a folder or tag
2. Click the sort button above the list pane (shows current sort mode)
3. Toggle between:
   - **Default**: Uses the global sort setting from preferences
   - **Custom**: Choose a specific sort order for this folder/tag only
4. Your custom sort preference is remembered for each folder and tag

### Using tags effectively

The tags section provides powerful ways to organize and find your notes:

- **Hierarchical organization:** Use nested tags like `#project/work/urgent` to create tag hierarchies
- **Quick filtering:** Click any tag to see all notes with that tag and its subtags
- **Untagged notes:** Find notes without tags by clicking "Untagged"
- **Drag to tag:** Drag notes onto tags to add that tag to the notes
- **Remove tags:** Drag notes to "Untagged" to remove all tags from those notes

### Managing draft and private notes

Use the "Excluded notes" setting to hide notes with specific frontmatter properties:

1. Add properties like `private, archived` to the excluded notes list
2. Add frontmatter to your notes:
   ```yaml
   ---
   private: true
   ---
   ```
3. These notes will be automatically hidden from the navigator

This is perfect for:
- Personal/sensitive content
- Archived notes you want to keep but not see daily
- Template files with a `template: true` property

## Support

If you have any questions, suggestions, or issues, please open an issue on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator).

## Development

### Built for Production

Notebook Navigator is built for reliability and performance with vaults containing thousands of notes:

**Robust Architecture**
- **Type-safe codebase**: Comprehensive TypeScript with complete type coverage - no `any` or `unknown` types
- **Memory-safe**: Automatic cleanup of event listeners, observers, and React components prevents memory leaks
- **Data integrity**: Promise queue serializes critical operations, preventing conflicts during rapid file operations
- **Stable UI**: Error boundaries keep the interface responsive if individual operations encounter issues

**Performance at Scale**
- **Handles 10,000+ notes**: TanStack Virtual renders only visible items, keeping scrolling smooth in large vaults
- **Instant startup**: Tag tree caching shows UI immediately while loading data in the background
- **Mobile-optimized**: Preserves scroll momentum and uses touch-optimized event handling
- **Smart caching**: Multi-layer caching minimizes disk operations and API calls

**Obsidian Compliance**
- **Plugin store approved**: Meets all Obsidian security and quality requirements
- **Safe file operations**: Uses only approved Obsidian APIs with proper error handling
- **Theme compatible**: Respects user themes with CSS variables and semantic classes
- **Cross-platform tested**: Verified on Windows, macOS, Linux, iOS, and Android

### Building from Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/johansan/notebook-navigator.git
cd notebook-navigator

# Install dependencies (requires --legacy-peer-deps flag)
npm install --legacy-peer-deps

# Build for development (with watch mode)
npm run dev

# Build for production (recommended method)
./scripts/build.sh
```

**Note**: Use `./scripts/build.sh` instead of `npm run build`. This script runs the build and checks for an optional `scripts/build-local.sh` file (gitignored) that can contain local deployment commands.

### Key Files

- **Main entry point**: `src/main.ts` - Obsidian plugin lifecycle
- **React entry point**: `src/view/NotebookNavigatorView.tsx` - Mounts React app
- **Main component**: `src/components/NotebookNavigatorComponent.tsx` - Two-pane layout
- **Types**: `src/types/index.ts`, `src/types/virtualization.ts`, `src/types/obsidian-extended.ts`
- **Settings**: `src/settings.ts` - Plugin settings interface and UI

## About

Notebook Navigator is built and maintained by [Johan Sanneblad](https://www.linkedin.com/in/johansan/). Johan has a PhD in Software Development and has worked with innovation development for companies such as Apple, Electronic Arts, Google, Microsoft, Lego, SKF, Volvo Cars, Volvo Group and Yamaha.

Feel free to connect with me on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/johansan/).

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0) - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
